Blog post on agentic AI with Quarkus - part 3 (#2301)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2025-05-08-agentic-ai-with-quarkus-p3.adoc

[source, java]
----
public interface MedicalExpert {

    @UserMessage("""
            You are a medical expert.
            Analyze the following user request under a medical point of view and provide the best possible answer.
            The user request is {request}.
            """)
    @Tool("A medical expert") // <-- Allows to use this LLM also as a tool for other LLMs
    String medicalRequest(String request);
}
----

In this way it is possible to provide a second alternative implementation of the same expert interrogation service, this time using a pure agentic approach, where the Router Agent is replaced by a single LLM, having the three expert as tools, that can autonomously decide which expert to invoke based on the user request.

[source, java]
----
@RegisterAiService(modelName = "tool-use")
@ApplicationScoped
public interface ExpertsSelectorAgent {

    @UserMessage("""

>             Analyze the following user request and categorize it as 'legal', 'medical' or 'technical',

Author: I just tried but I don't see any relevant difference. As a side note it would be nice to have a way (a specific annotation?) to say that the AI service should leave the control to a different service (not necessarily another LLM but any other tool in reality) when the first calls the second.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4f125cc6-8146-49b9-a363-81e59ab2c960)

            then forward the request as it is to the corresponding expert provided as a tool.
            Finally return the answer that you received from the expert without any modification.

            The user request is: '{request}'.
            """)
    @ToolBox({MedicalExpert.class, LegalExpert.class, TechnicalExpert.class})
    String askToExpert(String request);
}
----

The `@ToolBox` annotation is used to specify the list of tools that the agent can use, in this case the three experts. Note that, similarly to what it has been done for other agentic examples in the previous post of this series, this AI service has been configured to use a model that in the `application.properties` file has been named "tool-use" which is more capable of using tools in a proper way, in this case `qwen2.5` with 7 billions of parameters.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.langchain4j.ollama.tool-use.chat-model.model-id=qwen2.5:7b

> quarkus.langchain4j.ollama.tool-use.chat-model.temperature=0

Author: Done.

On the other hand, the workflow approach is more predictable and easier to debug, as the routing logic is explicit and can be easily traced. For instance, the behavior of the Router Agent alone  could be controlled and corrected with an output guardrail. Moreover, it also allows for more complex workflows, where the routing decision can depend on multiple factors and not just on the user request.

Finally, as evidenced by tracing of the agentic execution, its current implementation has a major drawback in the fact that the overall time to fulfill the user request is significantly increased.

[.text-center]
.Tracing agentic routing execution
image::routing-agentic-trace.png[align=center, alt="Tracing agentic routing execution"]

> This depends on how the agent is using the LLM expert as a tool: even though it has been explicitly required to forward the response of the expert as it is and without any modification, it seems to ignore this instruction and can't avoid to waste a relevant amount time reprocessing the expert's answer before returning it. In other words this is a side-effect of the fact that the agent is in complete control of the execution and there is no way to forward this control to a different LLM as it would be convenient in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This depends on how the agent uses the LLM expert as a tool: even though it has been explicitly required to forward the expert’s response as it is and without any modification, it seems to ignore this instruction. It can't avoid wasting significant time reprocessing the expert's answer before returning it. In other words, this is a side-effect of the fact that the agent is in complete control of the execution, and there is no way to forward this control to a different LLM, as it would be convenient in this case. 
```

[.text-center]
.Tracing routing workflow pattern execution
image::routing-workflow-trace.png[align=center, alt="Tracing routing workflow pattern execution"]
In this example, we use the same model to classify and generate the response. However, it is possible to use specialized models for the classification and each experts.
Now, let’s see how we can transform this workflow approach into a more agentic one.

Quarkus integration makes it straightforward to turn these AI “expert” services into _tools_ that another AI service can invoke. You only need to annotate the AI service methods with `@Tool` and configure the caller AI service with `@Toolbox`. This approach preserves the possibility of also invoking the single expert directly as an independent LLM service, and also using specialized models for each expert.

[source, java]
----
public interface MedicalExpert {

    @UserMessage("""
            You are a medical expert.
            Analyze the following user request under a medical point of view and provide the best possible answer.
            The user request is {request}.
            """)

>     @Tool("A medical expert") // <-- Allows to use this LLM also as a tool for other LLMs

Reviewer 2: Is this the MCP `@Tool` annotation?

Reviewer 2: Okay, maybe just add a note that mention that this is regular tool like any other and not an MCP tool (which as you said will be described in a later blog post).
The reason here is that many people have hearf of MCP these days so they will probably be wondering
